u1argl1: Good morning, cadets! Captain Toppo here, ready for our first lesson in survival skills. Today, we’re learning about argumentation. This means using knowledge… facts…and logic to explain ideas and concepts.
u1argl2: Arguments answer a driving question. This is any question we don't know the answer to yet. On planet WAT247, we will run into lots of these mysteries.To answer them, we need to build a strong argument. 
u1argl3: A good scientific argument has three parts. The claim is your main idea or answer to the question. Evidence is facts or data that support your claim. Reasoning connects your evidence to your claim. It explains how or why the evidence backs up the claim.
u1argl4: When you put all three parts together, your argument will be strong and clear. Our survival on this planet will depend on others trusting your arguments!
u2topol1: Good morning, cadets. Today in our survival skills series, we will explore topography. This is a topographic map. This map offers a 2D view of a planet's surface. It also highlights its 3D features… by using contour lines.
u2topol2: Contour lines link points at the same elevation, or height above sea level. They show how elevation varies across the land. Elevation dots that are the same… connect. 
u2topol3: The terrain eventually displays all contour lines. Only the contour indices are labeled.
u2topol4: When contour lines are close, the elevation changes a lot over a short distance. This indicates steep slopes. When contour lines are spaced out, it shows the elevation changes slowly. The area has a gentle slope.
u2topol5: You can use topographic maps to find hilltops… ridges… depressions… valleys and more.
u2topol6: Learning to read a topographic map may just keep you from falling off a cliff!
u3watershedl1: Good morning, cadets. Captain Toppo here. In this part of our survival skills series, we’ll focus on… watersheds. This is a picture of a watershed. A watershed is an area of land that drains or "sheds" its water into a common body of water.
u3watershedl2: When it rains… water flows downhill. It collects in creeks… which feed into larger streams and rivers. Finally, it makes its way to the ocean. Watersheds vary in shape and size. However, every piece of land belongs to a watershed.
u3watershedl3: Watersheds with smaller land areas have less water flowing through them. Watersheds that cover large areas of land have a lot of water flowing through them. 
u3watershedl4: Finding a large watershed may just prevent the team's death by dehydration!
u3waterflowl1: Good morning, cadets. Today in our survival skills series, we'll be talking about… water flow. Water and the things in it flow from areas of high elevation to low elevation. This is due to gravity.
u3waterflowl2: What you do upstream… can affect the water quality downstream. Even things you can’t see get carried downstream.
u3waterflowl3: This red dot is a pollutant. Watch how the red dot moves through the river. It travels from an area of higher elevation in the south to a lower elevation in the north. Avoiding areas downstream of a pollutant may just save us from dysentery!
u4soill1: Good morning, cadets. In today’s survival skills series, we’ll talk about… soil infiltration. Water from the surface can infiltrate, or flow, through soil and into the ground. Water will infiltrate down through soil layers due to gravity.
u4soill2: The rate at which water moves depends largely on the type of soil through which it passes. Under a microscope, soil shows particles that vary in size. As a result, the space between its particles varies. The greater the space between particles, the easier it is for water to pass through. Water moves slowly through soil that has small pore spaces. It flows quickly through soil with larger pore spaces.
u4soill3: Soil with smaller particles has more surface area. This helps water cling to it and resist gravity. As a result, water moves slowly and stays in the soil longer. Soil with bigger particles has a hard time holding water. Water moves fast through the gaps between these particles. 
u4soill4: As water moves deeper into the ground, it filters through layers of soil. This removes pollutants. As a result, the water is cleaner. Water will eventually meet bedrock. When this happens, it can’t flow down any further. The pore space in the area below is too small. At this point, water begins to collect and form large storehouses of water.
u4soill5: Soil is “saturated” when water fills every space between the soil particles. We call the uppermost surface of the saturated area the “water table.” The soil below the water table contains a lot of groundwater. This can be helpful when other water sources aren’t available.
u4soill6: To reach this water, wells can be dug deep into the ground to reach the water table. The deeper a well is, the cleaner its water. This happens because the water has been filtered through more soil layers. Be careful not to dig too far, though! If you hit bedrock, you'll be below the water table.
u4soill7: When you can’t find water on the surface, try looking underground. You may just save the team from dehydration!
u5evapcondl1: Good morning, cadets. Today in our survival skills series, we'll be covering… evaporation and condensation. You can find water in several different forms or states. It can be a liquid… a solid… or a gas.
u5evapcondl2: To change forms, water must have energy added… or removed. This often occurs by changing its temperature.
u5evapcondl3: Let's take a moment and look at the particles of each state of water. Notice how the particles in the solid form are close together. In the liquid state, particles are a bit farther apart. In the gaseous state, they are even more spread out.
u5evapcondl4: When water is solid, its particles are close together. When you add energy… the temperature goes up. The particles gain energy, move faster, and spread out becoming a liquid. If the particles gain enough energy, they can transition from a liquid to a gas. We call this process of a liquid… turning into a gas… evaporation. 
u5evapcondl5: The opposite process in which a gas… turns into a liquid… is called condensation. When water vapor cools, its particles lose energy. They move more slowly and start to clump together. If they continue to lose energy, the water vapor will eventually turn back into a liquid.
u5evapcondl6: Eventually, the temperatures can become so cold that water condenses, changes into liquid form, and falls from the sky as rain.
u5wcyclel1: Good morning, cadets. Today in our survival skills series, we'll be talking about the water cycle.
u5wcyclel2: The water cycle happens all around us. Surface water from oceans, lakes, and rivers can evaporate. When the sun shines… it heats the water, leading to evaporation.  
u5wcyclel3: As water vapor rises, it meets cooler temperatures in the atmosphere. Eventually, it will get cold enough for water to condense. Then, it will turn into liquid and fall from the sky as rain.
u5wcyclel4: Groundwater is also part of the water cycle. Surface water can infiltrate through soil to become groundwater. Groundwater can seep to the surface in areas where the water table is very high. It can also return to the surface through springs and even with the help of plants.
u5wcyclel5: Water evaporates, condenses, and infiltrates in a continuous cycle. This means the total amount of water on a planet like WAT247 stays the same. This will still be true even after millions of years!
u5wcyclel6: On a small scale we can see this cycle at work inside a solar desalinator. This is a simple tool that uses the energy from the sun to turn saltwater into freshwater. 
u5wcyclel7: Some are simple and some are complex, but they all work the same way. First, salty water enters a chamber. Then the sun heats up the salt water. When it gets hot enough it will start to evaporate leaving the salt behind. 
u5wcyclel8: After the water evaporates, the vapor touches a cool surface like glass or plastic. This causes the water to become colder and condense. The condensation drips down into a storage area where you can collect it as fresh water.
u5wcyclel9: A desalinator can keep you alive if you’re ever shipwrecked. Not that MHS brought any boats.

